---
title: Why Unsplash?
date: 2020-04-21 23:30:00
tags: [featured]
---

Let's start the story from far...

As a hobby photographer I always looking for places my photos can fit into. I started with my own handmade websites, but soon I realized it takes too much time for me to create a site which stands out form the crowd. It took much time because as a young web developer I put too many fancy techy eyecandies into those pages that hid the photos I wanted to show. After some dead-end, straight to the desk pages I turned to something else, actually a series of different sites I joined and tried to fit my photos and my hobby in.

## Fotozz.hu
At first I joined a Hungarian photography website called [Fotozz.hu](http://fotozz.hu). The focus of that site back then was to gather photographers together into a group where everyone tries to help each other with feedbacks so everyone in the community will learn a lot from each other and thrive to become a great photographer. For every feedback the site gave points, on the other hand to upload a photo I had to use some points. So this was the main motivator to spend some time with someone else's photo and give them some feedback. After a while a lot of people transformed to sharp-eyed photo critiques, picky and negative ones, which torn down my motivation to post any photo or give any feedback. I also realised I did not learn too much from the other non-educated, mostly rookie/hobby photographers. I felt like being in the kindergarten without a teacher... it was fun at the beginning, but it became boring and frustrating.

## Facebook
As most of us I posted some of my photos to Facebook: besides the low quality, random photos I uploaded project-like albums. That was a totally different thing, it seemed like finally I can upload as many photos as I want, share it with friends and forget the critiques. But as you might have guessed I got some likes and some generic "very cool pics", "wow amazing", etc... comments. Which became boring and pointless while I was still looking for feedback and some direction I can grow. So I dropped the album and photo posts and went with the crowd into the total nonsense what we know Facebook is all about... but I looked somewhere else, a technical challenge of keeping my photos safe and organized, because the amount of them exceeded the capacity of my hard drives.

## Flickr
I joined Flickr quite late, I think they were already over the top back then. I think their original concept was closer to Instagram than Google Photos (or Picasa) they transformed into. I used Flickr to store my photos in the cloud instead on my always risky hard drives (back then they announced the 1TB storage plan for free). They also provided some management and sharing capability so I was able to put my fine selections into albums. Despite the rusty admin pages and not-so userfriendly (compared to Google Photos) UI I spent huge amount of time uploading and sorting my photos there... despite the efforts I put into it I left Flickr for two reasons: it was hard to use it as a photo library and I was not able to put together my "professional" portfolio.

## Meanwhile
I spent a lot of time from the beginning to find my photo storage and library management solution. After I dropped the "create a date folder and put photos there" approach I used Canon's ImageBrowserEx I got with as I bought my first camera. Then I converted everything into Apple's iPhoto when I switched over to Macs, then into Aperture's library, then to Photos when Apple killed both, then I tried Lightroom and I went back to Photos. I played with the idea to manage everything with Google Photos too, but I could not find it "pro" enough, it is more like a good backup and sharing platform rather than a versatile photo library for my needs.

I used Aperture's website export feature and my own handmade site to put together my own portfolio site. Here is a small peek into the past: https://web.archive.org/web/20080612085153/http://www.koles.hu/
Unfortunately the content is lost, only the frontpage is archived. I managed a blog back then, posting various stuff, sometimes photo projects too. None of these tries fulfilled my expectations.

## The stock photo sites
I tried to get access to some stock photo sites: Getty images and Shutterstock, hoping that I might be able to earn some money from the photos I'll put there. I failed to get through the filters, but I was not super determined to do that, I gave up after 2 or 3 tries. I looked elsewhere, something that doesn't feel like working, where the first requirement is uploading photos and not fulfilling the customers' needs.

## 500px
500px started as a photo community/sharing site, their name came from the minimum image width they allowed to upload. Later they improved the portfolio aspect and back then their page was one of the best looking photo sites around. They started a marketplace too which was even more catchy for my eyes, so I started uploading my finest selection of photos and occasionally I still upload some: [500px](https://500px.com/kolesm). I'm proud that I sold some photos there and later when they strike a deal with Getty images my photos finally appeared there too.
What I like about 500px is that they kept this portfolio aspect and there is always the chance to make some money out of my hobby (even that income could not buy me the equipment and time I spend on it).

## Instagram
After I got disillusioned with Facebook I joined Instagram (back then they were independent from the big brother) and I enjoyed the visual blog aspect of it. It was great to find some really good photographers or just funny everyday life photos from sharp-eyed people without any serious attachment to photography. I used Instagram as my blog back then, but later I transformed it into something else: an ad-site for my 500px portfolio and my Facebook photography page I put together as a marketing trick. So Instagram became my ad platform for another ad platform to promote my money chasing effort on 500px. Yes this sounds pathetic I know, so I gave up on this after a while.
I also lost interest in Instagram from a different perspective too: the daily routine of scrolling through so many different, not categorized photos - the funny ones, friends' photos, pro photographers', ads... - became a useless habbit. Also I was not able to gain anything being on that platform. No feedback to my posts only some likes I was not able to decide the intention of. ("Like" equals meh nowadays for me: a slap on the shoulder, a nod, a forgettable hi, a vowel or a burp I can not understand, a checkmark that someone read my note...). As a last idea I started some thematic users there, but I realized the mobile only small images feed is not my platform, it does not inspire me.

## Unsplash
My last stop so far is [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/@mihaly_koles). That site started as a Tumblr theme and site posting photos for free, they left Tumplr and built their own site, but kept the free photos aspect. Now all my photos on Unsplash are free to use. So why am I uploading to Unsplash, what is the motivation?
I realized photography is my hobby, my free time activity what I do because I love to spend time taking the photo, retouch it and see it transforming to something I want to preserve from the moment I witnessed. Sometimes that moment is just a memory only important for me, sometimes it cheers people up or make them to whisper a quiet "wow". But at the end that is my time when I don't want to work on someone else's problem, idea or goal. That is my time and my accomplishement to have a photo I imagined or get surprised what I can get out from a moment. It is my craftmanship, my l'art pour l'art I don't have to explain.
Unsplash is a good place for that as I don't feel the tension to upload something that can be used in someone else's presentation, ad campaign, motivational book, etc... That is my free-for-all portfolio I can give as a gift to anyone and you can take it if you want.
No pressure, no hard feelings, no orders, just the feedback that my photos were downloaded more than 73.000 times and viewed more than 17 million times.
